---
layout: post
title: Euro Cup 2016 Visualization
subtitle: Varieties of Bar plots
---

The group matches are not exciting to me. What excites me is the knock-out games! I started watching Euro Cup 2016 from quarter finals. 
Due to different time zone, we always have to stay awake almost all night to watch the game. I predicted Germany to win this Euro Cup,
however they were defeated by France. All my friends were predicting France to win the final, and looking at the game, it was obvious France 
will win. France played brilliantly but they just couldn't score a goal to take away the cup. I would say that night, lady luck was sitting on
Portugal.   

Apart from games, I was also interested in game statistics. I have waited for the tournament to get over so that I can see the final statistics.
The data is posted on official UEFA  [site](http://www.uefa.com/uefaeuro/season=2016/statistics/index.html). And to transfer the data table 
posted on the website to R, I have used `rvest` package.    

```r
library(rvest)
```   
And to copy the data table from the site, the code goes like this   

```r
attempts <- read_html("http://www.uefa.com/uefaeuro/season=2016/statistics/round=2000448/teams/category=attacking/kind=attempts/index.html")

attemptsData <- attempts %>% 
  html_nodes("table") %>% 
  .[[1]] %>% 
  html_table()
```   
First, we have to save the url page where the table is displayed. Then using rvest function html_nodes("table") and then .[[1]] for table
1 and then html_table(), we can easily copy the table. In fact, the page has only one table. If there were two tables and we wanted both
then we would have used .[[2]] to transfer table number 2. For more detail, please read `rvest` package info.  

Once the data is successfully transfered to R, we can do some data exploration like   

```r
str(attemptsData)
head(attemptsData)
```




